In this lecture, I just want to get
everyone on board with writing
functions, because functions play a
critical
role in any R programming and you
tend to write a lot of them when you're
writing doing a
lot of data analysis or doing a lot of
kind of statistical analysis.
And so I just want to make sure that
everyone can kind of get started writing
functions and and particularly for those
who
are less familiar with programming
languages in general.
So this is just going to be about writing
your first function.
It's kind of like the hello world so to
speak of R.
So the first thing you're going to want to
do is you
going to want to write the function in a
text file, all right.
It's possible to write functions on the
command
line in R, but it usually no preferrable.
So usually you're going to want to put
your functions, in a separate file,
separate from any interactive stuff that
you're doing in the command line.
In the future you'll want to put your
functions in
an R package, which is a kind of a more
structured type of kind of, kind of
environment with
documentation and everything, but we won't
talk about that now.
Right now the first thing you're going to
want to
do is put your functions in a text file.
Okay, so the first thing we're going to
want to do is open up our studio.
So lets do that.
And so you can see here in R Studio
there's some there's
some stuff going on here from a previous
project that I'm working on.
So you, that may happen to you, and
generally you
can either close it or you can just ignore
it.
I wanted to create a new R script here, so
let's create a clean script here to put
our code into.
So the first function I'm going to write
is really simple
it's just going to take two numbers and
add them together.
So this function obviously doesn't have a
real point to it but it shows you how
to use the function syntax, how to specify
the arguments and how to return the value.
So the function that adds two values I'm
just going to call it add two.
And and so you get it you use the function
directive to start it off.
Now it's going to take it's going to add
two values so it has to take
two arguments so I'm just going call the
two arguments x and y and then
I'm going to take the two arguments and
add them together with the plus operator
alright x plus y and then I close out the
function with the curly brace.
So you can see that I didn't have to
do anything special to return the value
that that's the
sum of the two elements because the or any
R
function, the, the function returns
whatever the last expression was.
So here there's only really one
expression.
So therefore its the last expression and,
and it equals the sum of x and y.
So here I can, I can highlight this guy
and run it
in the console, and you can see now I've
got my function here.
I can say add two, and lets give it say
three and five and hopefully I get eight.
Yes that's a good sign.
So it adds the two numbers together, and
that's that.
So it's a very simple function, and and,
you've now written your first function in
R.
S the next function that I want to
talk about is a little slightly more
complicated.
It's going to take a vector of numbers,
it's going to, it's going to return
the subset of the vector, that's, that's
above the vector value of ten.
So any number that's bigger than ten, it's
going to return those numbers for you.
so, let's bring back our original
function.
We'll call this one, above ten.
Just because it gives you any number
that's above ten.
snd, it's going to take a vector here,
we'll call it x,
you don't have to call it x, I'm just
calling it that.
And I like to open and close the curly
braces right away, just
so you know where the beginning and the
end of the function is.
If you happen to have a lot of code in,
you know, in, in a single file.
So the first thing I'm going to want to do
is I want to construct a logical
statement that figures out which elements
of
this vector x are, are greater than ten.
All right?
So I'm going to assign an object.
I'll call it use because these are, these
are the numbers that I'm going to use.
And I'll say x greater than ten.
All right?
So this'll return a logical vector, of
trues and falses
to indicating which element of x is
greater than ten.
And then I'm going to subset the vector x
with this logical vector.
So now this function returns, the subset
of the vector x that is bigger than ten.
Of course if there are no elements of x
that are
bigger than ten, that it will return an
empty numeric vector.
Now of course, there's really nothing
special about the number ten.
I just kind of made that up, and so you
may want to created a
function that allows people to sub, to
kind of extract the elements of a vector.
That are above an arbitrary other number,
right?
And so, so it could be ten, it could
be 12, it could be five, it could be
anything.
So maybe you'll want to allow the user to
specify that number.
So I'll just call, I'll create a new
function here.
Call above.
So it doesn't have the ten encoded in it.
I'll use the function directive, and I'll
have a
second arbitrary called n, which can be
any number really.
[SOUND] So let's start it off, we'll get
the curly braces in there,
and now I'll create a logical statement
that x is greater than n.
Right?
And then I'll subset the vector x based on
that logical statement.
So now if I can source this into R.
Oops, and I can run my function here.
So I'll just create a vector.
Let's say x is one through 20.
And I'll say above x.
Oh I, you see, so I didn't specify the
number n, so it's not going to know
what to cut it off at, so I need to
specify the threshold, so let's do ah,12.
And you can see it returned all the
numbers that are greater than 12.
So that's kind of as we expected, and so
the function appears to be working well.
Now let's suppose that maybe there is
something
special about the number ten, and maybe
it's
something that people are going to be
kind of be
doing very often and it's a very common
number.
So you might you want to specify a default
argument so you might want to the default
to
be ten, so remember when I ran the
function before and I didn't specify the
number n.
It gave me an error or maybe you don't
want
people to have to encounter that error,
and so you'll specify
a default value n equals ten so people
don't specify
the cutoff value n, it will just
automatically default to ten.
So now I can run this in R and now if I
do above, which is x, you see I don't get
the error anymore.
It automatically gives you all the numbers
that are bigger than ten.
So it's kind of nice in R when you're
writing functions
to be able to specify default values like
this that make the
life of the user just a little bit easier,
specially for very
common cases, where it's not important
that the user specify an argument.
So those are some very simple functions,
in R that can be used
to kind of process data or make do simple
calculations, like adding two numbers.
The next function I want to talk about is,
is just going to take
a matrix or a dataframe and calculate the
mean of each column.
Right, so this is slightly more
complicated
you, you have to take your argument and
then you have to loop through each column
to calculate the mean of each one, right.
So this is going to involve using a
for-loop
and, and so we'll talk about it here.
So let's call this function column mean,
because that's what it does,
and I'll use the function directive here,
now it's going to take an argument.
I like to call my arguments x, you don't
have
to so why don't we just call it y for fun.
And so y is going to be a data frame or a
matrix, and we're going to go
through the columns of this data frame or
matrix and calculate the mean of each
column.
So the first thing I need to figure out is
how
many columns does this thing have, and
that can be easily done.
I'll call it n c for number of columns and
we can use the n call function for that.
That will calculate the number of columns,
and, and then I need to
initialize a vector that's going to that's
going to store the means for each column.
The length of this vector has to equal the
number of columns, right.
So I'll just call it means, and it'll be a
numeric vector
equal to the length of the number, equal
to the number of columns.
So this is just an empty vector.
It doesn't, it's going to have, it's
going to
be initialized to, to be all zeros.
But we're going to fill it as we go
through the column.
So now we want to for-loop through the
columns.
And I'll say i is in and then I'll say one
through nc.
So this creates a, an integer vector
starts
a one and ends at the number of columns,
and then I'm going to for-loop through and
for each
I, I'm just going to assign to my means
vector.
The mean of x bracket I, right.
Oh sorry that's called y here now.
And that's it, and then so for I, I
haven't returned
anything yet, so right now this function
doesn't do anything particularly useful.
But what I want to do is return the vector
of means and so I'm just going to return
that.
And that's, since that's the last
expression
in the function that what will get
returned.
So I can source this into R,
and I'll just find some arbitrary dataset.
We can use the air quality dataset I
guess.
I'll just take the column means of that,
and see how it works.
Okay, so I, there are six, I think there
are
six columns in this dataset, so it gave me
six means.
Now you can see that the first two columns
have NAs.
And that's because it, if the, if the
vector has
an na in it, then you can't calculate the
mean.
And so the one thing you might want to do,
is, by default, is throw
out all of the missing values and
just calculate the mean amongst the
observed values.
And so, you'll notice that a lot of
functions have a feature where it's like,
where they, you can, you can choose
whether you want to remove the nas or not.
But let me just add up an argument here,
it's called [UNKNOWN] na.
And it will default to true, right.
And then I'll pass this argument to the
mean function.
So the mean has an na.rm argument, and
I'll pass at this value.
And so now I can default or remove the
na's when I, calculate my column mean.
So sources send to R and with the run in
the console column mean, and
so now the default will be now I get my
means
for those columns because the default was
to remove the na's.
I could say false here, and then my na's
will come back.
So I can always choose to kind of go back
to the old behavior if I wanted to.
So the last thing you want to do any time
you're writing a
function the most important thing of
course is to save your file.
So right now this file is unsaved.
If you don't save it and R Studio crashes
or something
happens you'll lose all your work and so
you want to go
to the save I meant save as menu, and just
save
your file as, you know, functions or
whatever you want to call it.
And give it the .r extension, and now
you're code is saved to a file.
So that should get you started, just
writing
some simple functions in R, for your
programming
assignment you'll have to write a few
functions
that kind of go through and look at data.
But I just wanted to get you started
writing your first
functions so that you know kind of how the
directive, the function directive
works, how the arguments work, and you can
play around a little
bit with with more complicated ideas as
you work through the assignments.